Course 3, module 6.
In this module, we're going to
talk about solid state drives, and
some of the ways they differ from
the traditional spinning disks.
Solid state drives do not have cylinders
or spindles or any moving parts at all.
They're made up of NAND flash memory
chips, and you can see in the slide,
see the memory chips,
we can see the power terminal and
the data terminal,
this is a SATA connection.
Solid state drives cannot overwrite
data like our spinning drives can,
so once something is marked as deleted,
were sent to the recycle pan and
no longer in use,
that area can't simply be overwritten.
That area must be white cleaned
before it can be written to again.
And that's different than our
traditional spinning disks.
Data is written to a solid
state drives called pages, and
it's deleted in blocks, and
blocks are made up of multiple pages.
We can think of pages like sectors and
blocks like clusters.
It's not exactly the same, but
it's a way to think about it.
So we're deleting data
in multiple pages box.
Now, a lot of things happen with SSD
solid state drives behind the scenes,
and this happens as soon as
power is applied to the drive,
the user has no control
on how this happens.
Some of the things that happen are wear
leveling, trim and garbage collection.
Now, wear leveling, even it spreads
out to write across the chips,
not to write to the same chip multiple
times, because each of these chips has
a finite amount of writes that it's going
to be able to do before it goes bad.
So by wear leveling, you increase
the longevity of the drive itself.
Trim identifies the areas of the chips
that are no longer in use and it wipes it.
This happens like I said
behind the scenes, so
that's going to change where
the area of data is stored.
Garbage collection actually reorganizes
the data, putting files that
are no longer use or areas of the drives
that are no more in use on one chip,
and taking files from areas
that are still allocated,
that is still in use and moving them
somewhere else on the drive itself.
So it's going to reorganize the data, and
then when that happens,
trim comes through and wipes the chips.
So this can change theoretically,
the hash value of your drive.
You just by applying power to it,
a write blocker won't stop this from
happening, there's no way to stop it.
It happens as soon as power
is applied to the disk.
So I just want you to be aware of that,
and
that only applies to solid state drives.